% !TEX root = ../../thesis.tex
%
\chapter{Testing applied to production systems}
\label{sec:testing}

In this chapter, we tackle the problem of testing production
systems, without disturbing them, and without having any
specification \emph{a priori}. Those two constraints sounds
familiar as they have already been taken into consideration in
Chapter \ref{sec:modelinf:prodsystems}. We present a passive
testing technique built on-top of \emph{Autofunk v3}. First, we
infer reference models of a system under analysis $\mathit{Sua}$
using the technique presented previously.  Then, we check whether
a system under test $\mathit{Sut}$ conforms to these inferred
models by means of two implementation relations. We use a
slightly modified version of the trace preorder relation to
strictly check conformance between the two systems. Because the
inferred models are partial, they likely lack information, which
implies that our first strict relation may be too "strong".  That
is why we propose a second (weaker) implementation relation to
comply with Michelin's needs.  Such a relation is less strict
than the first one in order to accept non-standard behaviors down
to a certain point. These two relations are leveraged in an
algorithm for performing offline passive conformance testing.  We
end this chapter with a few results on this testing technique.\\

\minitoc
\clearpage

\pagebreak

\input{src/testing/1_introduction}
\input{src/testing/2_offline-passive-testing}
\input{src/testing/3_experimentation}
\input{src/testing/4_conclusion}

\cleardoublepage
